---
layout: post
title:  "A Undigested Bit of Beef: Part 2"
date:   2020-07-07 02:00:00 -0000
categories:
---

After some wrangling I ended up at CMU to resume my Ph.D.

But, I was stil having health problems: a lot of them. I saw doctors,
nutritionists. I had my pancreas go into critical state during my first
seemster which made me fail a number of courses because I was in the hospital
for a week. Something was still not right. Doctors couldn't tell me anything
-- they thought I might have hepatitis, but it turned out that I didnt. They
couldn't explain it. My hospital meals were patently gluten-free and
dairy-free: apple sauce, boiled chicken, and a juice box. Sometimes they
brought me a gluten-free cookie when they had one, god bless UPMC.

When I left the hospital, I went into a mode where I wouldn't eat anything
anyone didn't cook for me. Still sick? Fuck. How can this be? I just cooked
some meat and vegetables. Through a process of elimination I learned that it
had to be the aeromatics I had been using (I was just taking a cooking class,
that's where I learned all these terms.) So, I knew it had to be garlic or
onion. So, I went on a low FODMAP diet. I did the first to stages: I took
everything I was cooking and cut it out: onions, shallot, green onion,
garlic, etc. Turns out, I felt better: a lot better. I was lucid, I was
there, I was all the way there. I mean, when I cut gluten out I felt like a
fog that's been over my life has been lifted for years, and when I finally
cut this shit out, I felt like, it was clarity. I felt like I was seeing life
for the second time (the gluten cut-out) was the first time I had this
clarity. While gluten gave me clarity of mind when I cut it out, cuttin
alliums out gave me a sort of intenstinal-clarity, where you finally feel...
complete. That sounds weird, but if you have IBS you know that feeling during
the day where you can't think clearly because you feel like you constatnly
need to visit the restroom -- that passed and was a mere memory.

So, I've learned that the key for me staying healthy is avoding gluten, it's
avoding dairy (lactose and casein), it's avoding garlic and it's avoding
onion. Yeah, that sounds horrible, right? Well, I'm making my own bread,
which turns out to be cheaper. I'm replacing garlic and onion: I use garlic
infused olive oil, it's expensive, but still gives the flavor; I'm leveraging
more recipies that use mirepoix, where I can manage the balance using celery
and carrots instead of onions. I'm using green onions, only the green parts,
to get flavor where I can without relying on the white roots. It's not easy,
but it takes time to learn the subsitutes. It's process of making your own
cookbook based on what you can have.

My mother has terrible allergies to nuts and coconut.  She can't eat out 
at all, beacuse she's allergic to basically any cooking oil except olive oil.  I remember
that when I was growing up and I went out to travel to Europe she said to me that
she was glad I didn't have her allergies.  Well, turns out I got them even worse.  
I won't like, it sucks.  I can't go out to eat, I can't ever go out for a "beer".  It sucks.
It makes dating extremely hard: I can't meet someone for coffee: I can't have coffeee, it ruins me.  I can't go out for beer, it's deadly (literally.)
I can't go out for appetizers, I can't go out for anything.  It makes dating horrible, but, it's OK.

I cook now, that's what I do.  I can't go out, I can't see the world, I can't travel, I can't go out for beers.

You know what I can do?  
I can cook you a fantastic meal, one you won't forget, one that's on the cheap.  
Because if it's one thing that the quarantine and my allergies have taught me is that good home cooking, no matter how attractive it might be, is the skill we should have in 2020. 